# An interactive open-source course in muscle physiology and electromyography for undergraduates

```{card}
:class-card: sd-outline-primary

**Authors:** Erin McKiernan    
**Affiliation:** Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Open Research Community Accelerator (ORCA)   
**Date:** February 16, 2025
```

## Introduction

An important part of undergraduate education in physiology is
understanding the musculoskeletal system. This e-book and course is
designed to teach students about muscle structure and function in an
interactive way that combines theory and practice. Classes with
information about muscle anatomy, mechanisms of contraction, and
generation of electrical activity in muscle cells are accompanied by
experimental practicals that introduce students to the technique of
electromyogram (EMG) recording. Through these activities, students learn
how to record the electrical activity of their muscles using EMG, and
how EMG can be used to investigate aspects of muscle activation,
biomechanics, force generation, motor unit recruitment, and muscle
fatigue. In addition, computational practicals teach students how to
analyze EMG recordings to quantify different elements of muscle
activity, introducing and reinforcing important data science skills.

The chapters in this e-book each cover a different experimental or
computational practical, complete with complementary theoretical lesson
plans (including supplementary slide decks), experimental protocols,
analysis code written in Python, and sample data sets for exploration.
All materials are publicly available and openly licensed for reuse, both
herein and at the following links:

- **GitHub repository**: <https://github.com/emckiernan/electrophys>

- **Repo archive via Zenodo**: {cite}`McKiernan_Zenodo_2021`

- **Prior published work**: {cite}`McKiernan_Medina_2021`

- **Related work**: {cite}`McKiernan_Arancio_2025`

## How to use this e-book

This e-book and its contents are designed to be modular in nature such
that they can be reused and remixed in a variety of ways. The full suite
of materials can be used sequentially to run a complete stand-alone
course in muscle physiology and EMG. However, educators could instead
use only some of the materials to supplement other course activities,
depending on their needs. For example, an educator teaching a physiology
course could run just the ‘EMG Basics’ practical (Ch. 1) to reinforce
concepts seen in their class regarding electrical activity in muscle.
Or, an educator teaching a data science course could use our sample EMG
recordings and the ‘EMG Analysis’ practical (Ch. 3) to have their
students apply analysis techniques to physiologically relevant data
sets. Open licensing of all the materials also means that the materials
can be modified as educators see fit. The lesson plans were originally
designed with a Biomedical Physics curriculum in mind, but can be
adapted to have more of a biological or physiological focus, depending
on the intended audience.

The contents of this book (and sequence of activities if a full course),
are as follows:

[Ch. 1: Muscle physiology and EMG
basics](chapter-1.md)

[Ch. 2: Graphing and visually exploring EMG
data](chapter-2.ipynb)

[Ch. 3: Filtering, processing, and analyzing EMG
data](https://curvenote.com/oxa:EPpXta8zJdzN048lz8AR/N4aWmYttZWOcQi2i2rNZ)

[Ch. 4: Using EMG to measure muscle
fatigue](https://curvenote.com/oxa:EPpXta8zJdzN048lz8AR/oZzZ9YkLDYhuIWC3d5Sk)

[Ch. 5: Quantifying muscle fatigue from EMG
data](https://curvenote.com/oxa:EPpXta8zJdzN048lz8AR/vW8ZGtkrQs3vPifO99sp)

[Ch. 6: Dual EMG recordings of muscle
pairs](https://curvenote.com/oxa:EPpXta8zJdzN048lz8AR/pIDHVE4gOQaQL1y9Os3r)

[Ch. 7: Forearm EMG with
dynamometry](https://curvenote.com/oxa:EPpXta8zJdzN048lz8AR/ezirbKT2x8fYE4rCdOgB)

[Ch. 8: Analyzing forearm EMG and
dynamometry](https://curvenote.com/oxa:EPpXta8zJdzN048lz8AR/Pl7lyGUpTCUyEhT3xELs)

[Ch. 9: Recording respiration with EMG and
spirometry](https://curvenote.com/oxa:EPpXta8zJdzN048lz8AR/DIygfLcJx0B6YlWQvuBE)

[Ch. 10: Instrumentation of a simple myoelectric
prosthetic](https://curvenote.com/oxa:EPpXta8zJdzN048lz8AR/Fwnarvyq1j9AlkJ1JWeF)

## Educational specifications

- **Level of study**: Undergraduate

- **Degree programs**: Biology, Biomedical Engineering or Physics,
  Medicine, Physiology, other applied or interdisciplinary programs
  (e.g. Applied Mathematics)

- **Semester or year**: 4th semester, i.e. 2nd-year undergraduate

- **Courses**: Human Physiology, or other related courses

- **Recommended prerequisites**: Molecular & Cellular Biology

## Licensing

This e-book is licensed under the [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International (CC BY 4.0)
license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/deed.en). The
following is a human-readable summary of the license.

You are free to:  
**Share** — copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format  
**Adapt** — remix, transform, and build upon the material for any
purpose, even commercially.

Under the following terms:  
**Attribution** — You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to
the license, and indicate if changes were made. You may do so in any
reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor
endorses you or your use.

**Please cite**:  
McKiernan, E.C. & Project abreLA. \[Insert chapter name.\] In “*An
interactive open-source course in muscle physiology and electromyography
for undergraduates”*. \[Insert DOI\]. Retrieved \[Insert date\].

Any *code* shared as part of this project is licensed under [The MIT
License](https://opensource.org/license/mit).

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
“Software”), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

Any *data* (e.g., EMG recordings) shared as part of this project are
licensed under the [Creative Commons CC0 1.0 Universal
license](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/deed.en). The
following is a human-readable summary of the license.

*No Copyright*:

The person who associated a work with this deed has dedicated the work
to the public domain by waiving all of his or her rights to the work
worldwide under copyright law, including all related and neighboring
rights, to the extent allowed by law. You can copy, modify, distribute
and perform the work, even for commercial purposes, all without asking
permission.

## Funding

This work is a product of Project abreLA, Advancing Biomedical Research
& Education in Latin America, organized by the [Open Research Community
Accelerator (ORCA)](https://www.orcaopen.org/). This project has been
made possible in part by grant 2024-347841 from the Chan Zuckerberg
Initiative DAF, an advised fund of the Silicon Valley Community
Foundation, awarded to ORCA. Earlier foundational work was supported by
UNAM-DGAPA-PAPIME PE213817 and PE213219 awarded to ECM.

```{image} images/intro-1.png
:alt: AbreLA and ORCA logos
:width: 70%
:align: center
```

### References

```{bibliography}
:filter: docname in docnames
```
